I am just about done building this monstrosity, but I wanted to share with everyone the project I've been working on for the last year.

Last year I joined the Rose City Astronomers and started to fulfill a childhood dream of building my own telescope. My original design was a 6" F/8 ball design, and I was planning to grind my own mirror. That quickly changed when a suitcase was discovered at the monthly telescope workshop containing a 10" F/4.5 mirror with no branding or known pedigree. There was some speculation that it could be from a old Meade, but the mirror surface looked good and the price was excellent. So I bought the mirror then we pulled out the Ronchi tester and discovered that the mirror was almost perfectly flat. That was enough to convince me I had a good deal and I started redesigning my scope.

At this point my main design goal was: "I want to build a 10" scope that is under 10kg total and can be collapsed small enough that I can take it camping or on a road trip."

I had originally planned to do a simple truss type ball scope with some 3d printed parts, but I was soon turned onto the wonderful world of tensegrity string scopes, and incorporated that into my CAD. The lightweight nature of a tensegrity design combined with 3D printing meant that V1 of my secondary ring and the struts was ~1.5kg.

With the 'tube' designed and built, my next task was the ball. Based on advice from Jerry Oltion, I chose to use an acrylic lighting globe. The first globe shattered itself because of stress fractures induced by cutting it with the grinding wheel of a dremel. The second globe was much more successful because I used a jig saw with a fine tooth blade. Then I chose to stiffened it with cotton and polyester resin composites. I really didn't want to deal with fiberglass, but the cotton was a terrible choice because it absorbed the resin so fast, and the polyester resin has such a short pot life that it turned out very ugly. I am still using that ball but it will probably be replaced this winter.


The primary mirror cell was one of the easier subassemblies to make. After the disaster of the polyester resin, I decided that I did not want attach the main mirror to the ball, so I decided to hang it from the lower ring using threaded rod. I ended up with 3 lengths of 1/2" threaded rod attached to a piece of plywood at the bottom, and held in place using an adjustable kinematic mount up top. This allowed me to angle the whole mirror cell for collimation. It also couples structure of the secondary mirror to the primary mirror using wood primarily and metal.

My initial secondary design was a wire spider that used guitar tuners to adjust tension and collimation. This worked well enough, but the string layout was not stable under tension and sometimes the whole mirror mount would flip 90° sideways.

At this point I had a mostly complete scope that I was able to take observing for a few sessions before the misery of a PNW winter set-in. The few sessions of observing did not go very well since the scope was very top heavy and couldn't be aimed lower than 45° of altitude without falling over. This limited my observing to a few Messier objects that were directly overhead, and my 32mm eyepiece because anything of higher power was too wobbly.

The next step was to add the counterweight in the form of 9,000 BBs and 300ml of epoxy resin in the base of the ball. I had a lot of trepidation about this step because I was close to my 10kg goal, and I really didn't want to overshoot that target. The final mass of BBs is slightly less than what I calculated it should be, but that worked out in my favor. I was able to move the mirror further back in the ball and I have redesigned the secondary mount to be 400g lighter which saves me ~2.7kg of counterweight.
